Lab 2 - Answers to the questions

1. Look at pyproject.toml and uv.lock. What changed?

pyproject.toml got the four new libraries in its dependencies list: mlflow>=3.16.0,
scikit-learn>=1.9.1, torch>=2.14.0 and torchvision>=0.29.0. Plus a [[tool.uv.index]] block
pointing at PyTorch's CUDA index and a [tool.uv.sources] block sending torch and torchvision
to it, so we get the GPU build instead of the CPU one.

uv.lock went from 101 packages to 180. The extra 79 are transitive dependencies pulled in by
those four: numpy, pandas, scipy, sqlalchemy, flask, fastapi, matplotlib, pyarrow, joblib and
the rest. mlflow brings most of them since it ships a tracking server and a web UI.

The two files do different jobs. pyproject.toml is the short list we write by hand, with loose
version ranges. uv.lock is generated by uv and pins every package to one exact version with
its hash and source index, so uv sync rebuilds the identical environment anywhere.


2. What is --backend-store-uri used for? What is --default-artifact-root used for? What is the
   difference between the metadata mlflow stores and the artifacts it stores?

--backend-store-uri is where mlflow keeps the structured metadata of every run. We pointed it
at sqlite:///mlflow.db, so it created an mlflow.db file with tables for experiments, runs,
params, metrics and tags. Small rows of text and numbers, queried to build the runs table and
the metric charts in the UI.

--default-artifact-root is where mlflow writes the files a run produces, when the run doesn't
specify its own location. We set it to ./mlruns, so trained model weights, plots and any other
saved file land there under the run's ID. The folder only appears once a run logs something.

The difference is metadata versus files. Metadata is everything describing the run (lr = 0.001,
val_accuracy = 0.72 at step 3, start time, status) and lives in the database, which is why it
can be sorted, filtered and compared across runs. Artifacts are the actual output blobs, too
big for a database, so they sit on disk and the database just stores a path to them.


3. Why shouldn't mlflow.db and mlruns/ be tracked by git, and why shouldn't they be tracked by
   dvc either?

Not git: mlflow.db is a binary sqlite file that changes on every run, so git can't diff it and
every commit would store a fresh copy of the whole database. mlruns/ holds model weights, which
are large binaries that would bloat the repo the same way the images would have in Lab 1.

Not dvc either: dvc is for versioned inputs that a run depends on and that must be reproducible
from a commit, like the dataset. These two are the opposite, they are local outputs generated
by running the code, they belong to this machine's tracking server, and they change constantly.

Run history already has a home, the tracking server, and that's what makes it queryable and
comparable. Git holds the code, dvc holds the data, mlflow holds the runs, and nothing needs
to be duplicated between them.


4. What happens the first time you call set_experiment with a name that doesn't exist yet?

mlflow creates it. There is no error and nothing to set up by hand: the first run of the
training script made a new "food11" experiment with id 1, next to the built-in "Default" one
which has id 0. It appears in the experiment list in the UI straight away.

Creating it also assigns its artifact location, ./mlruns/1, taken from the server's
--default-artifact-root. Every run logged into food11 then gets its own subfolder there.

On later calls the name already exists, so mlflow just selects it and the new runs are added
to the same experiment instead of a new one being created.


5. What is the difference between mlflow.log_param and mlflow.log_metric? Why does log_metric
   take a step argument and log_param doesn't?

A param is an input, fixed for the whole run: lr, batch_size, epochs, the model architecture.
It is written once and never changes, so it is a single value per run.

A metric is an output, measured while the run progresses: train_loss, val_loss, val_accuracy.
Its whole point is that it changes, so mlflow stores a series of values per metric instead of
one, and step says where each value sits in that series. We pass step=epoch, so the UI can draw
loss and accuracy per epoch instead of showing one number.

That is also why the runs table filters and sorts on params, and the charts are drawn from
metrics. A param with a step would be meaningless since it never moves.


6. Open the run in the mlflow UI. Find the params, the metric charts, and the logged model
   artifact. Where does the model artifact actually live on disk?

Under the mlruns folder, at the artifact location the food11 experiment was given. In this
mlflow version the models are stored per experiment rather than inside the run folder:

    mlruns/1/models/m-6dfcc642bbd24d35bb7d5332c19359fc/artifacts/

Inside that folder are data/model.pth (the pickled weights, about 43 MB) plus MLmodel,
requirements.txt, conda.yaml and python_env.yaml, which record how to reload it.

So the split from question 2 shows up here concretely: the params and the metric series come
out of mlflow.db and are shown as tables and charts, while the model itself is a file on disk
that the database only points to.


7. Which learning rate gave the best val_accuracy? Is higher always better?

lr = 0.0001, by a wide margin. Comparing the runs at batch_size 32, 5 epochs:

    lr = 0.0001   val_accuracy 0.7609   test_accuracy 0.8184
    lr = 0.001    val_accuracy 0.5684   test_accuracy 0.6168
    lr = 0.01     val_accuracy 0.1788   test_accuracy 0.1852

No, higher is not better, it is the opposite here. At lr = 0.01 the model sits at 0.18, barely
above the 0.09 you would get by guessing one of 11 classes at random: the steps are so large
that training never settles. Lowering the rate steadily improves things, because we are
fine-tuning a pretrained resnet18 and small steps keep the useful ImageNet weights instead of
destroying them.


8. Use the parallel coordinates plot to look at lr, batch_size and val_accuracy together. What
   pattern do you see?

lr is what decides the outcome, batch_size barely matters. The lines separate cleanly by
learning rate into three bands, 0.76 / 0.57 / 0.18, and lower lr goes with higher accuracy.

Batch size does almost nothing by comparison: at lr = 0.001, batch 32 gives 0.5684 and batch 64
gives 0.5703, a difference far too small to mean anything on a dataset this size. So if only
one hyperparameter is worth tuning further, it is the learning rate.


9. Sort the runs table by val_accuracy descending. Which run is the best one? Note its run ID.

    run name  : merciful-mink-416
    run ID    : a6e7d48d7d2441299c60f28a3ca4b6f4
    params    : dataset mini, lr 0.0001, batch_size 32, epochs 5
    val_accuracy  0.7609
    test_accuracy 0.8184

It is the best on val_accuracy and on test_accuracy at the same time, and it has the lowest
val_loss (0.71) of all the runs, so the ranking is not an accident of one metric.
